# Notes from Institutions and credible commitment.pdf

**Note:** The title of my essay gives away the key questions that I believe we must answer. How have economies in the past developed institutions that provided the credible commitment that has enabled more complex contracting to be realized; and what lessons can we derive from that experience that will be of value today in the ongoing process of building or rebuilding economies?
 [Page 2](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=2)

**Note:** The issue is straightforward: how to bind the players to agreements across space and time. Game theory provides the (more or less trivial) solution: players can be bound when the gains from living up to agreements exceed the gains from defecting. However, although game theorists have developed highly ingenious models of conditions under which it is worthwhile cooperating, they do not answer the key question of how to realise those conditions1
While Ronald Coase has made the fundamental contribution of pointing out that when it is costly to transact institutions matter, neither he nor most followers have explored how property rights and other institutions come about.
 [Page 2](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=2)

**Note:** /. The Road We Have Travelled
 [Page 3](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=3)

**Note:** It was, I believe, Armen Alchian who resurrected the study of property rights from its Marxist heritage, Harold Demsetz who elaborated some of the implications of property rights, and Ronald Coase who tried to persuade economists that with positive transaction costs property rights affect economic performance. From these pioneering efforts an entire literature has evolved that is effectively captured in Eggertsson's [1990] recent survey of what he calls "neo-institutional economics." He correctly separates the path chosen by Oliver Williamson, which is closely related to the interests of the pioneers from the path I have chosen, which seeks to discover how institutions evolve through time and why institutions that produce poor economic (and political) performance can pers
 [Page 3](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=3)

**Note:** In 1973 with the publication of the Rise of the Western World, Bob Thomas and I made property rights the center of our explanation of economic performance. We slighted the complicated issues of enforcement and ignored the informal constraints of conventions and norms of behavior. Since then I have become convinced that the issue of the enforcement of property rights is central to credible commitment and a major historical stumbling block to realizing the potential gains from trade and that informal norms of behavior are critical parts of the way institutions affect performance
 [Page 3](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=3)

**Note:** The separation of institutions from organizations is crucial if one is to get a handle on the dynamics of institutional change (North [1990]). Institutions are the rules of the game and organizations are the players. In contrast to Williamson, whose pionerring work on the governance and transaction costs of organization has provided us with in depth insights into those issues, my emphasis on organizations is on their role as the initiators of institutional
 [Page 3](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=3)change. Entrepreneurs and members of organizations invest in the skills knowledge which lead to revised evaluations of opportunities, which in tu induce alteration of the rules or the gradual revision of informal constra The kinds of skills and knowledge perceived to have a high payoff w course, reflect the incentives embodied in the institut
 [Page 4](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=4)

**Note:** It is one thing to assume that individuals act rationally in the sense that the term is used in expected utility theory when they go to the supermarket or participate in financial markets in the United States; it is quite another thing to make that assumption when individuals confront the complicated choices involved in making decisions about the polity and the economy that shape institutional change.

 [Page 4](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=4)

**Note:** 4]). The result is that multiple equilibria are possible due to different choices by agents with identical tastes. It is surely time that rational choice theorists took stock of the immense and impressive literature of cognitive scientists that has long since reduced to an absurdity the notion of instrumental rationality
 [Page 4](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=4)

**Note:** 2. Credible Commitment
 [Page 4](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=4)

**Note:** Property rights are specified and enforced by polities and without an in d understanding of the way polities evolve it is not possible to understand the property rights
 [Page 4](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=4)

**Note:** All four of the issues raised above are connected with the problems of credibility. Let me elaborate on exactly what is at stake before exploring in more detail how each impinges on the problems of credibi
 [Page 4](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=4)

**Note:** hat a commitment is credible in either of two senses, the motivational or the imperative. A commitment is motivationally credible if the players continue to want to honor the commitment at the time of performance. In this case it is incentive compatible and hence self-enforcing. It is credible in the imperative sense if the player cannot act otherwise because performance is coerced or discretion is dissabled (as illustrated in the case of Ulysses and the Sirens).
 [Page 4](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=4)

**Note:** Commitment is not the whole solution t throughout history (and in the present ailing economies) it is overwhelmingly the most pressing issue.
 [Page 5](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=5)

**Note:** A Neoclassical Story of Long Run Economic Growth
 [Page 5](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=5)

**Note:** If transaction costs were zero he could force them to work and confiscate all output in excess of subsistence; but the costs of policing are not zero. Barzel [1977] reminds us in a classic article on slavery, that it pays the slave owner to give over certain rights to the slave in return for more output; the same principle applies to our ruler. He can get more income by promising to let constituents keep a portion of their incremental output. However the ruler continually faces of tradeoff between the higher income he can obtain by relaxing restrictions on constituents (thereby increasing their productivity and both their and his income) and the increasing threat to his security that the relaxed restrictions entail because his subjects have both more freedom of action and resources to overthro
 [Page 5](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=5)

**Note:** w him. Equally the constituents face the dilemma that the ruler may at some point renege on his promises and confiscate the accumulated wealth of his constituents. It is at this point that both types of credible commitment enter the picture. The ruler may be able to structure the game so that it is both in his and his constituents' interest to abide by the rules - motivational credib
 [Page 5](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=5)

**Note:** Barzel [1992] describes how over centuries rulers and constituents have gradually evolved the rule of law. This evolution can be interrupted or fatally diverted by wars. Barzel's is a strictly neoclassical story - that is institutions play no independent role and the rationality postulate holds. The model in his story is England and only England directly fits the story. It is a good story with important implications for our understanding of the evolution of the rule of law and economic grow
 [Page 5](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=5)

**Note:** What makes it a good story? It is that a parsimonious theory can rende explanation of what would appear to be a long run fundamental tendency economies of the western world. England may be unique but the broad pa of political/economic growth of western societies during the past half mille is consistent with this tendency. The implication of this model is that tim critical. That is, credible commitment can only be realized over a very lon period of time. Time is crucial for the ruler since he/she must have a disco rate that can realize the gains from long ter
 [Page 6](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=6)

**Note:** contracting. If the time hor of the ruler is shortened by fiscal crises (historically a consequence of wa by the mortality of a ruler unleavened by the utility derived from heredit succession then confiscation becomes an attractive alternative.
 [Page 6](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=6)

**Note:** 4. The Rationality Postula
 [Page 6](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=6)

**Note:** The neoclassical story, like so much of our cliometric history constructed on that framework, builds on an implicit set of assumptions that are derived from the rationality postulate of economic theory. There are no institutions (or if they exist they play no independent role) in the neoclassical world because the instrumental rationality postulate renders them superfluous. Institutions are the humanly devised constraints that structure human interaction and they exist to reduce the ubiquitous uncertainty arising from that interaction. Human beings are - to use Simon's phrase - intendedly ration
 [Page 6](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=6)

**Note:** In the world of instrumental rationality and ideologies don't matter, and efficient ic - characterize economies. In that of incomplete information and limited men information and in consequence develop re to structure exchange. There is no implicat (in the sense of providing low cost tra ideologies play a major role in choices and markets or no markets at all.
 [Page 7](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=7)

**Note:** An Institutional/ Cognitive Story of Long Run Economic
 [Page 7](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=7)

**Note:** Let's start at the beginning - well almost the beginning. As tribes evolved in different physical environments they developed different languages and, with different experiences, different mental models to explain the world around them. To the extent that experiences were common to different tribes the mental models provided common explanations. The language and mental models formed the informal constraints that defined the institutional framework of the tribe and were passed down intergenerationally as customs, taboos, myths that provided the continuity that we call culture and that forms part of the key to path dependenc
 [Page 7](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=7)

**Note:** With growing specialization and division of labor the tribes evolved into polities and economies; the diversity of experience and learning produced increasingly different societies and civilizations with very different degrees of success in solving the fundamental economic problems of scarcity. The reason is that as the complexity of the environment increased as human beings became increasingly interdependent, more complex institutional structures were necessary to capture the potential gains from
 [Page 7](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=7)

**Note:** The story of England specifically and western Europe more generally was actually one in which the institutional structure of feudal northwest Europe and the evolving mental models of the participants combined to produce the unique conditions that led to the particular pattern of development summarized above. Specifically, political competition of the fragmented polities of western Europe forced political entrepreneurs to obtain more revenue to survive; that
 [Page 7](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=7)

**Note:** could be realized by making bargains over property rights with econ organizations and their entrepreneurs. The mental models of the acto reflected in the intellectual tradition of Hobbes, Locke, Montesquieu, and Scottish enlightenment) were equally context specific. The incentive stru not only encouraged the evolution of a legal structure such as the law merc (Milgrom, North and Weingast [1990]), and the growth of science ( [1992]), but also the development of military technology that led ultimatel European hegemony (North [1981]). The result was the institutional chang leading to the evolution of representative governments and market econo of the Netherlands, England, and eventually some other economies of Nor west Europe. These conditions were not duplicated in Spain, Africa, C Latin America, or else
 [Page 8](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=8)

**Note:** 6. Five Propositions on Institution
 [Page 8](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=8)

**Note:** 1 . The continuous interaction between institutions and organizations in economic setting of scarcity and hence competition is the source of institu change. 2. Competition forces organizations to continually invest in skills and knowledge to survive. The kinds of skills and knowledge individuals and their organizations acquire will shape evolving perceptions about opportunities and hence choices that will incrementally alter institutions. 3. The institutional framework provides the incentives that dictate the kinds of skills and knowledge perceived to have the maximum pay-off. 4. Perceptions are derived from the mental constructs of the players. 5. The economies of scope, complementarities, and network externalities of an institutional matrix make institutional change overwhelmingly incremental and path dependent.
 [Page 8](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=8)

**Note:** The underlying in return in an economy is perceived t organizations will invest in skills that w if high returns are perceived to come f organizations to invest in the skills and ity. The result is a path dependent pattern in which the institutional matrix and the mental models of the players interact to shape incremental change. In the more than 2500 years from Solon to Stalin the incentive structure provided by the institutional framework and the mental models of the actors have guided the choices that have resulted in the enormously diverse patterns of economic change. Most of human economic history is not a story of economic growth but one of stagnation or, at best, very modest economic growth. 

7. A Transaction Cost Approach to Political Markets
 [Page 9](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=9)

**Note:**  I can do this best in a transaction cost framework. Transaction costs are the costs associated with the measurement and enforcement of agreements. In economic markets those costs consist of the measurement and enforcement of the physical and property rights dimensions of goods and services and of the performance of agents. While such measurement is frequently costly, the physical dimensions have objective characteristics (size, weight, color, etc.) and the property rights dimensions are defined in standard legal terms. The exchanging parties have an incentive to be informed, competition plays a critical role in inducing enforcement, and the judicial system provides coercive enforcement. Even so, economic markets throughout history, and in the present world, are frequently very imperfect, beset by high transaction costs, and defined by institutions that produce incentives to work against economic efficiency.
 [Page 9](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=9)

**Note:** Political markets are far more prone to inefficiency. It is extraordinarily difficult to measure what is being exchanged - promises for votes; the voter has little incentive to be informed; and there is no direct enforcement mechanism to see that "contractual agreements" are carried
 [Page 9](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=9)

**Note:** 8. Credible Commitment in Economic History
 [Page 10](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=10)

**Note:** I now return to the central issue of this essay and explore the way credible commitment has evolved historically. The success story of Western Europe does occur over five hundred years and does appear to be a result of a sequence of incremental changes in economic and political institutions which gradually increased the scope of credible commitments to permit the increasingly complex contracting essential to creating and realizing the potential of more productive technologies. There is still much about this evolution that we do not know, but recent research has documented some important steps along the way (see Milgrom, North and Weingast [1990]; Milgrom, Greif and Weingast [1992]; and Greif [1989], for exampl
 [Page 10](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=10)

**Note:** 1992]; and Greif [1989], for examples). The early progress was a result of voluntary organizations devising institutional arrangements to solve problems of impersonal exchange over time, first in a specific community but gradually evolving to support such exchange over both time and space. The polity played little or no role in such arrangements. The gradual integration of the law merchant (mercantile law) into a larger legal system was a lengthy process but eventually made possible the enforcement of contracts over a larger trading area. Was the evolution of such voluntary organizations and the gradual blending of the "voluntaristic" enforcement mechanisms into a legal system unique to western Europe? If it was why was that so? The crucial watershed in development that was essential to the creation of a capital market and clearly separated the Western European experience from the rest of the world was the shackling of the arbitrary behavior of government with respect to credible commitment over property righ
 [Page 10](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=10)

**Note:** The questions at the end of each of the past two paragraphs raise some fundamental unresolved issues. Let me briefly explore them in the context of the four distinctive research issues I posed at the beginning of this essay. 1 . Formal rules are an important part of the institutional framework but only a part. To work effectively they must be complemented by informal constraints (conventions, norms of behavior) that supplement them and reduce enforcement costs. If the formal rules and informal constraints are inconsistent with each other the resulting tension is going to induce political instability. But we know very little about how informi norms evolve. 2. Organizations are the primary source of institutional change. Several propositions follow from this assertion: 1) The greater is the competition amongst organizations (whether internal to a given economy or external to it) the greater is the incentive to invest in skills and knowledge to enhance the organization's survival opportunities and hence the greater the rate of institutional change. 2) Since organizations are the agents of change in an economy a change in bargaining power of existing organizations (as a result of changes in their relative success in accomplishing their objectives) will lead to alterations in the institutional framework. For example, a decline in the perceived effectiveness of existing organizations will weaken their ability to maintain and support the existing institutional structure. 3. Changes in the formal rules (and enforcement) come through the polity (broadly encompassing the judicial as well as the executive and legislative branches). Successful economic growth has been historically linked with the evolution of representative government, and secure property rights with the rule of law; but puzzles abound. Is it possible to model this process in the context of a wealth-maximizing framework or do we have to invoke the mediating influence of informal norms to constrain the behavior of the players at numerous margins? Is the time constraint described earlier as crucial simply the establishment of reputation or is it the time it takes to develop complementary norms to the evolving formal rules? How do we account for successful growth in some modern economies which neither have evolved representative institutions nor had government corruption and mismanagement strangle economic opportunities? The exceptions in the modern world to the representative polity as a prerequisite to economic growth suggest the high pay-off to be derived from modeling the political process in third world countries. 4. The way the actors perceive the issues that confront a society will shape the policies that they pursue. Surely 70 years of communist policies should persuade economists that ideas matter and that there is no guarantee that the mental models that humans construct to explain the world around them will converge to a common denominator so that there develops the common inter-
 [Page 11](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=11)

**Note:** 9. Institutional Analysis and Ailing Economies
 [Page 12](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=12)

**Note:** If the foregoing analysis and conjectures have merit they suggest some medicines for ailing economies radically different from those currently being prescribed. I shall conclude this essay by simply enumerating some of the policy implications. 1. Successful restructuring of an economy entails a restructuring both of property rights to provide the "correct" incentives and of the mental models of the players to induce choices that are complementary to such incentives. 2. Restructuring property rights means not only creating the formal rules but creating and implementing a judicial system that will impartially enforce such rules. 3. It takes much longer to evolve norms of behavior than it does to create formal rules and for those economies without a heritage of such norms the reconstruction process is necessarily going to be long and the outcome very uncertain. 4. The objective of restructuring must be the creation of an adaptively efficient economy - that is one that over time will provide an institutional framework for a wide menu of alternative choices for organizational innovation and also wipe out failures. It is one thing to get "the prices right" at a moment of time; it is something else to create an institutional framework that will get them right over time. 5. The key to success is the establishment of a viable polity that will support and enforce such institutional constraints and at this stage of our knowledge we know very little about such an institutional framework. Is it possible to establish a democratic polity in such contexts, or will such a polity fragment and self-destruct in the context of the inevitably painful period of reconstructi
 [Page 12](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%20and%20credible%20commitment.pdf#page=12)
