# Notes from Institutions, transaction costs and economic growth.pdf

**Note:** This essay develops a theoretical framework which explores the historical obstacles to economic growth. These obstacles are examined in the context of the political economic institutional framework of economies in history and consequent transaction costs that determine economic performance and growth
 [Page 1](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=1)

**Note:** The objective of this essay is twofold: to develop a theoretical framework which focuses on the historical obstacles to economic growth; and to suggest the implications of the framework for the study of poverty, equity, and growth in developing countries.
 [Page 1](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=1)

**Note:** Coase pointed out that the neoclassical model, which has served as the basis of economic reasoning for most scholars in the Western world, holds only under the severely restrictive assumption of zero transaction costs; but that with positive transaction costs, institutions matter.
 [Page 1](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=1)

**Note:** There are no institutions in the neoclasical world; and indeed in such a world, growth is not a problem, its rate being simply a function of the number of children people have and the rate of saving
 [Page 1](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=1)

**Note:** Adam Smith economists have recognized that gains from trade are the key to the wealth of nations. Specialization and division of labor have made possible the improved productivity that arises from technological change, better resource allocation, and specialized production, the key underlying features of modern economies. What economists have not realized until recently is that exchange is not costless
 [Page 1](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=1)

**Note:** In fact the costs of transacting are the key to the performance of economies. There have always been gains from trade, as classical international trade theory has taught; but so too have there been obstacles to realizing these gains. If transport costs were the only obstacle, then we would observe through history an inverse relationship between transport costs, on the one hand, and trade and exchange and the well-being of societies on the other. But recall that as early as the Roman Empire of the first two centuries A.D. trade was possible over a vast area, even with the transport costs of the time; and that after the end of the Roman Empire trade declined and probably the well-being of societies and individual groups declined as well.
 [Page 2](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=2)

**Note:** From the evidence of history, let us turn to the economies of the world today and observe the enormous disparity between the rich countries of the western world and the poor countries of the third world.
 [Page 2](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=2)

**Note:** It is not transport costs but the costs of transacting that are the key obstacles that prevent economies and societies from realizing well-being.
 [Page 2](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=2)

**Note:** As a result, the measured transaction costs in such a society are very low because of the dense social network of interaction. Cheating, shirking, opportunism, all features that underlie modern industrial organization theory, are limited or indeed absent, because they simply do not pay. Norms of behavior are seldom written down. Formal contracting does not exist, and there are few formal specific rules. However, while measured transaction costs in such societies are low (although unmeasured costs of societal cooperation in tribal societies may indeed be high), their production costs are high, because specialization and division of labor are limited by the extent of the market defined by personal exchange.
 [Page 2](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=2)

**Note:** As a result, in modern Western societies we have devised formal contracts, bonding of participants, guarantees, brand names, elaborate monitoring systems, and effective enforcement mechanisms. In short, we have well-specified and wellenforced property rights. The result of all this is that resources devoted to transacting are large (although small per transaction) but the productivity associated with the gains from trade is even greater; and high rates of growth and development have characterized Western societies. Of course these institutions in turn depend on a much more complex institutional structure that makes possible the specification and enforcement of property rights, which in turn allow transactions to occur and productivity gains from modern technology to be realized.
 [Page 3](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=3)

**Note:** Increasing specialization and division of labor necessitate the development of institutional structures that permit individuals to take actions that involve complex relationships with other individuals, which require both personal knowledge and time. The evolution of more complex social frameworks will not occur if such institutional structures cannot reduce the associated uncertainties.
 [Page 3](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=3)

**Note:** But why isn’t it automatic to develop more and more complex institutions that will enable us to handle more complex interdependence? Indeed, <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">much of the literature of game theory and the stories of institutional development imply that the progress of primitive societies to the status of modern Western societies should be automatic and unilinear</mark>. The answer is quite clear. The breakdown of personal exchange is not just the breakdown of a dense communication network but is the breakdown of communities of common ideologies and of a common set of rules that all believe in. The rise of impersonal rules and contracts means the rise of the state and with it an unequal distribution of coercive power. This provides the opportunity for individuals with superior coercive power to enforce the rules to their advantage
 [Page 3](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=3)

**Note:** <mark style="background: #FFB86CA6;">In fact, one of the most evident lessons from history is that political systems have an inherent tendency to produce inefficient property rights which result in stagnation or decline. There are two basic reasons for this result. First, the revenue that can be raised by rulers may be greater with an inefficient structure of property rights that can, however, be effectively monitored and therefore taxed, than with an efficient structure of property rights that has high monitoring and collection costs</mark>.J Second, rulers can seldom afford efficient property rights, since they would offend many of their constituents and hence become more insecure.
 [Page 4](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=4)

**Note:** Finally, time enters into the story. We observe that the creation of new rules does not in itself immediately produce new stable forms of behavior. <mark style="background: #FF5582A6;">Rules and norms of behavior are deeply ingrained in human beings, and security is associated with a given code of conduct and behavior, which will only gradually change. Thus the key to understanding institutions, and indeed the dilemma of institutional change, is to recognize that for individuals, perceptions about what constitutes codes of conduct and rules that they can live with will only gradually evolve over a lifetime. </mark>Institutional analysis is at base the study not simply of the rules of the game but of the individual responses to such rules
 [Page 4](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=4)

**Note:** The issues can be summarized in more formal terms. <mark style="background: #FF5582A6;">Modern economic growth results from the development of institutions that permit an economy to realize the gains from specialization and division of labor associated with the sophisticated technology that has developed in the Western world in the last several centuries.</mark>
 [Page 4](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=4)

**Note:** There are four major variables involved in the costs of exchange which fundamentally influence the rate of growth of economies. <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">The first is the cost of measuring-measuring the valuable attributes of the goods and services being exchanged or measuring the performance of agents.</mark>
 [Page 4](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=4)

**Note:** The second variable is the exchange process resulting from the size of the market. In personal exchange, kinship ties, friendship, and personal loyalty all play a part in constraining the behavior of participants, or repeat dealing and personal knowledge of the other participants constrain behavior. All of these factors reduce the need for costly specification and enforcement. A handshake suffices for even complicated exchange. Absent these factors, and the exchange process becomes much more costly
 [Page 5](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=5)

**Note:** Enforcement is the third variable. In a world of perfect enforcement there would be a neutral third party impartially evaluating disputes and awarding compensation to the party injured as a result of contract violation. In such a world, opportunism, shirking, and cheating would never pay
 [Page 5](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=5)

**Note:** The first three variables determining the costs of exchange arise as a consequence of an environment in which individuals maximize at every margin. If cheating pays, one cheats; if loafing on the job is possible, one loafs; if one could with impunity burn down a competitor, one would do so. In the neoclassical world, behavior is only constrained by rules and the effectiveness of their enforcement. Although the neoclassical assumption has been a powerful tool in analyzing market exchange, it is clearly incomplete. In the context of the high costs of measuring performance, complex social organization would be impossible were everyone to murder, cheat, steal, and shirk whenever he found it profitable. Honesty, integrity, living up to the spirit as well as the letter of the law do matter. But how much? The neoclassical assumption is that preferences or tastes matter but are
 [Page 5](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=5)

**Note:** constant. But ideological attitudes, the fourth variable, are not constant. The strength of ideology can be measured by the premium people are willing to incur rather than “free ride.” Such a premium is the cost of one’s convictions. The premium varies according to one’s beliefs about the justice of the rules and the contractual arrangements of the society, and it can be influenced by education, propaganda, and symbols.
 [Page 6](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=6)

**Note:** These four variables have combined to produce an enormous variety of forms of economic organization, which can be subsumed, however, under three general types: personal exchange, impersonal exchange without thirdparty enforcement, and impersonal exchange with third-party enforcement. Let me elaborate upon each of these “ideal” types.
 [Page 6](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=6)

**Note:** Personal exchange, characterizing small-scale production and local trade, has been the predominant form of organization throughout history.
 [Page 6](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=6)

**Note:** Impersonal exchange without third-party enforcement covers an enormous variety of types of organization, spanning relatively large-scale retail (and wholesale) trading, long-distance and cross-cultural trade, and forms of organization in which one party has overwhelming coercive power relative to another. The sug or bazaar economies illustrate the first of these.g The cornrnenda and variations upon it typify the second; serfdom and slavery the third.“’ In the case of the bazaar and cornmenda the lack of third-party enforcement leads to elaborate efforts to establish repeat dealings and clientization, to use kinship ties, and to set the trade within the context of rituals and religious precepts in order to constrain the participants
 [Page 6](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=6)

**Note:** Impersonal exchange with third party enforcement is the essential requirement for sustained economic growth. A society that would achieve the productive benefits of great specialization can only do so with an elaborate structure of law and its enforcement. There are no cases of complex high income societies that do not have an elaborate structure of government. In such economies, impersonal exchange involves the high measurement costs of complex contracting necessary to realize the potential of the technology that comes from specialization. Neither self-enforcement by the parties themselves nor trust is a viable way of enforcing such contracts.
 [Page 7](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=7)

**Note:** Because modern technology is capital-intensive, characterized by large-scale production and continuous output, modern economies are necessarily complex and interdependent systems." A large variety of economic institutions are necessary to facilitate such an economic structure in order to engage in contracting which 1) has reliability, 2) specifies the nature of the exchanges as precisely as possible, and 3) minimizes the potentiality of opportunism. The key features of the institutional structure of modern economies are contracting that permits continuous production and distribution and also the enforcement of contracts over long periods of time
 [Page 7](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=7)

**Note:** Ideally, such a body of property rights are flexible, in the sense of allowing a variety of organizational forms for long-term and short-term contracts, thus encouraging the growth of spot markets, firms, and financial markets of all kinds that allow one to take advantage of this technology. <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">It is one thing to be able to describe the institutional structure of successful economies; it is something else altogether to be able to specify how one can realize such an economic-political system. Here the new political economy is still in its infancy. Most of the research to date explores the political structure of well-developed economies rather than the evolution of political economic systems that turn out to be successful.</mark> Still, our historical knowledge of the successful economies does gives us some clues. When we examine the Netherlands and England in the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries, we observe the development of market-induced pressures to alter the political system in such a way as to embed rules and their enforcement in an impartial body of law as far removed as possible from arbitrary changes. The development of representative government in these two successful economies is consistent with this development, for representative government implies a body of law that is impersonal and not subject to arbitrary confiscation or alteration by rulers.
 [Page 8](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=8)

**Note:** How can we measure the efficiency of political and economic institutions? Traditional national income accounting conceals rather than reveals the critical features of institutional efficiency for three reasons: the cost of transacting may be so high that no production occurs, transactions costs are not separated out from other costs in the National Income Accounts, and some costs of transacting do not go through the market and therefore are not measured. Let me examine each in turn. The first problem is by far the most difficult to deal with. Increasing productivity by realizing the gains from specialization requires the development of an institutional framework to lower the costs of transacting (per exchange). Property rights that are unstable, that have perverse incentives (i.e,, disincentives to undertake productive investment), or that cannot be enforced will be evidenced by a failure to develop the institutions of finance, credit, banking, marketing, insurance, etc., which would make possible transacting at a profitable production cost. The absence of such institutions when compared to their presence in successful developing countries would provide essential clues for exploring production failures as a result of the high cost of transacting. The second problem is solvable and indeed, a preliminary study of measuring the transaction sector in the American economy from 1870 to 1970 has been undertaken in a study by North and Wallis in Volume 51 of the Income and Wealth Series.'" It includes a workable definition of transaction costs that can be employed in other studies and a guide to the way the transaction sector has evolved in a successful economy.
 [Page 9](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=9)

**Note:** The third problem is no different than the traditional problems posed in national income accounting, in which substantial resources do not go through the marketplace and therefore measurements of the transaction sector do not capture them. In particular, transactions costs that do not go through the marketplace reflect the high costs of searching where information is not efficiently distributed and substantial costs in undertaking economic activity in compliance with rules and regulations.
 [Page 10](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Institutions%2C%20transaction%20costs%20and%20economic%20growth.pdf#page=10)
