# Notes from Private and common property rights.pdf

**Note:** The relative advantages of private property and common property for the eciency, equity, and sustainability of natural resource use patterns have been debated in legal and economic literatures for several centuries. The debate has been clouded by a troika of confusions that relate to the dierence between (1) common property and open-access regimes, (2) common-pool resources and common property regimes, and (3) a resource system and the e ow of resource units. A property right is an enforceable authority to undertake particular actions in specic domain
 [Page 1](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=1)

**Note:** The issue of the relationship between private property and common property has engaged both legal and economic scholars in a long series of controversies over the meaning, the sequence of development, and the superiority of private vs. common property.
 [Page 1](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=1)

**Note:** Both have their doctrinal aspects. And, the dominant view in both disciplines has been that private property is clearly superior to common property. Many scholars think of contemporary examples of common property as remnants of the past, likely to disappear as we enter the twenty-rst century (see Atran, 1986, 1993)
 [Page 2](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=2)

**Note:** Recent research, however, has challenged the presumption that private property is necessarily superior to common property.
 [Page 2](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=2)

**Note:** Prior to the publication in 1861 of Ancient Law by the distinguished English jurist, Henry Sumner Maine, the accepted view among Western jurists was that the origin of the concept of property in ancient times was the occupation of land by a single proprietor and his family (Grossi, 1981). Further, the superiority of individual property holdings was so well accepted in the legal literature of the early nineteenth century that the possibility of other forms of property existing on the European continent threatened juridical views about the origins of social order. Maine drew not only on his own extensive research in India but also on the work of Georg Ludwig von Maurer (1854, 1856) on the primitive Germanic village communities, the Mark, and of the pioneering work of William Blackstone (1766).
 [Page 2](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=2)

**Note:** Maine concluded that: ‘it is more than likely that joint-ownership, and not separate ownership, is the really archaic institution, and that the forms of property that will aord us instruction will be those that are associated with the rights of families and of groups of kindred’ (Maine, [1861] 1963, p. 252). This set o a urry of publications challenging and supporting his conclusion (see extensive bibliographic citations in Grossi, 1981). The great debate had much more than academic importance, as major political struggles continued throughout the nineteenth century over the status of the many remaining forms of common property on the European continent
 [Page 2](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=2)

**Note:** Ackerman (1995), for example, start their recent textbook on property law with a rst chapter devoted to ‘The Debate over Private Property’. The second chapter addresses ‘The Problem of the Commons’. In the latter chapter, they include parts of the famous article by Hardin (1968) on ‘The Tragedy of the Commons’, but then ask students the following questions: ‘Private property is often said to avert the tragedy of the commons. But does it? Who enforces property limitations? Does another kind of “commons” problem lurk in the organization and maintenance of a_ property regime?’(Ellickson, Rose and Ackerman, 1995, p. 141).
 [Page 3](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=3)

**Note:** Economists tend to view common property institutions as having a longer history than private-property institutions and to explain the growth of modern, Western societies in part as the result of changing from common property to private property (North and Thomas, 1976; North, Anderson, and Hill, 1983).
 [Page 3](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=3)

**Note:** A farmer who owns his own labor, land and other factor inputs, for example, is likely to see a direct relationship between investments and the level of benet achieved over the long term. A farmer who belongs to an agricultural production cooperative, on the other hand, may see only a loose connection between personal contributions and benets. The more individuals in a society whose work is only loosely connected to their benets, the more pervasive an attitude of free riding can become. If everyone tends to free ride on the work of others, overall economic productivity will be low.
 [Page 3](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=3)

**Note:** Private-property rights, however, cannot simply emerge spontaneously from a common property system. Private-property rights depend upon the existence and enforcement of a set of rules that dene who has a right to undertake which activities on their own initiative and how the returns from that activity will be allocated (V. Ostrom, 1989)
 [Page 3](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=3)

**Note:** While some rules generate incentives that greatly increase the welfare of most participants in an economy, there are always individuals who resist changes because of benets they receive from a prior system or propose
 [Page 3](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=3)

**Note:** Rulers may also receive substantial returns from making rules that benet some to the detriment of others. Thus, rent-seeking behavior is expected on the part of both entrepreneurs and rulers.
 [Page 4](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=4)

**Note:** Common property regimes are, therefore, presumed by many economists to be inecient. There are three sources of ineciency. One is rent dissipation, because no one owns the products of a resource until they are captured, and everyone engages in an unproductive race to capture these products before others do (Knight, 1924; Gordon, 1954; Scott, 1955; Schaefer, 1957; Cheung, 1970; C. Clark, 1976, 1980; Dasgupta and Heal, 1979). The second is the high transaction and enforcement costs expected if communal owners were to try to devise rules to reduce the externalities of their mutual overuse (Demsetz, 1967; Coase, 1960). The third is low productivity, because no one has an incentive to work hard in order to increase their private returns (North, 1990; Yang, 1987). Common property regimes are presumably retained by rulers who do not understand the enhancement in overall economic welfare that will result from a change to private propert
 [Page 4](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=4)

**Note:** A common policy prescription is articulated by R. Smith (1981, p. 467) when he states that ‘the only way to avoid the tragedy of the commons in natural resources and wildlife is to end the common property system by creating a system of private property rights’.
 [Page 4](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=4)

**Note:** The source of confusion relates to the dierences between (1) common property and open-access regimes, (2) common-pool resources and common property regimes, and (3) a resource system and the ow of resource units. All three sources of confusion reduce clarity
 [Page 4](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=4)

**Note:** The Confusion between Common Property and Open-Access Regimes In a now classic article, Ciriacy-Wantrup and Bishop (1975) clearly demarked the dierence between property regimes that are open access, where no one has the legal right to exclude anyone from using a resource, from common property, where the members of a clearly demarked group have a legal right to exclude nonmembers of that group from using a resource (see also Bromley, 199la, 1992b).
 [Page 4](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=4)

**Note:** The Confusion between Common Property and Open-Access Regimes In a now classic article, Ciriacy-Wantrup and Bishop (1975) clearly demarked the dierence between property regimes that are open access, where no one has the legal right to exclude anyone from using a resource, from common property, where the members of a clearly demarked group have a legal right to exclude nonmembers of that group from using a 336 Private and Common Property Rights 2000 resource (see also Bromley, 199la, 1992b
 [Page 5](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=5)

**Note:** Open-access regimes (res nullius) - including the classic cases of the open seas and the atmosphere - have long been considered in legal doctrine as involving no limits on who is authorized to use a resourc
 [Page 5](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=5)

**Note:** Some open-access regimes lack eective rules dening property rights by default (Dales, 1968). Either the resources aected by these open-access regimes are not contained within a nation-state or no entity has successfully laid claim to legitimate ownership. Other open-access regimes are the consequence of conscious public policies to guarantee the access of all citizens to the use of a resource within a political jurisdiction
 [Page 5](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=5)

**Note:** A third type of open-access regime results from the ineective exclusion of nonowners by the entity assigned formal rights of ownership. In many developing countries, the earlier confusion between open-access and common property regimes paradoxically led to an increase in the number and extent of local resources that are eectively open access. Common property regimes controlling access and harvesting from local streams, forests, grazing areas, and inshore sheries had evolved over long periods of time in all parts of the world
 [Page 5](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=5)

**Note:** As concern for the protection of natural resources mounted during the 1960s, many developing countries nationalized all land and water resources that had not yet been recorded as private property. The institutional arrangements that local users had devised to limit entry and use lost their legal standing, but the national governments lacked monetary resources and personnel to monitor the use of these resources eectively. Thus, resources that had been under a de facto common property regime enforced by local users were converted to a de jure government-property regime, but reverted to a de facto open-access regim
 [Page 6](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=6)

**Note:** The Confusion between a Resource System and a Property Regime
 [Page 6](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=6)

**Note:** All common-pool resources share two attributes of importance for economic activities: (1) it is costly to exclude individuals from using the good either through physical barriers or legal instruments and (2) the benets consumed by one individual subtract from the benets available to others (Ostrom and Ostrom, 1977b; E. Ostrom, Gardner, and Walker, 1994). Recognizing a class of goods that shares these two attributes enables scholars to identify the core theoretical problems facing individuals whenever more than one individual or group utilizes such resources for an extended period of time. Using ‘property’ in the term used to refer to a type of good, reinforces the impression that goods sharing these attributes tend everywhere to share the same property regime.
 [Page 6](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=6)

**Note:** Property as Bundles of Rights A property right is an enforceable authority to undertake particular actions in a specic domain (Commons, 1968). Property rights dene actions that individuals can take in relation to other individuals regarding some ‘thing’. If one individual has a right, someone else has a commensurate duty to observe that right. Schlager and Ostrom (1992) identify ve property rights that are most relevant for the use of common-pool resources, including access, withdrawal, management, exclusion, and alienation. These are dened as: Access: The right to enter a dened physical area and enjoy nonsubtractive benets (for example, hike, canoe, sit in the sun). Withdrawal: The right to obtain resource units or products of a resource system (for example, catch sh, divert water). Management: The right to regulate internal use patterns and transform the resource by making improvements. Exclusion: The right to determine who will have access rights and withdrawal rights, and how those rights may be transferred. Alienation: The right to sell or lease management and exclusion rights (Schlager and Ostrom, 1992).
 [Page 8](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=8)

**Note:** In much of the economics literature, private property is dened as equivalent to alienation. Property-rights systems that do not contain the right of alienation are considered to be ill-dened. Further, they are presumed to lead to ineciency since property-rights holders cannot trade their interest in an improved resource system for other resources, nor can someone who has a more ecient use of a resource system purchase that system in whole or in part (Demsetz, 1967)
 [Page 8](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=8)

**Note:** Larson and Bromley (1990) challenge this commonly held view and show that much more information must be known about the specic values of a large number of parameters before judgements can be made concerning the eciency of a particular type of property right
 [Page 8](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=8)

**Note:** Instead of focusing on one right, it is more useful to dene ve classes of property-rights holders as shown in Table 1. In this view, individuals or collectivities may hold well-dened property rights that include or do not include all ve of the rights dened above. This approach separates the question of whether a particular right is well-dened from the question of the eect of having a particular set of rights. ‘Authorized entrants’ include most recreational users of national parks who purchase an operational right to enter and enjoy the natural beauty of the park, but do not have a right to harvest forest products. Those who have both entry and withdrawal use-right 340 Private and Common Property Rights 2000 units are ‘authorized users’. The presence or absence of constraints upon the timing, technology used, purpose of use and quantity of resource units harvested are determined by operational rules devised by those holding the collective-choice rights (or authority) of management and exclusion. The operational rights of entry and use may be nely divided into quite specic ‘tenure niches’ (Bruce, 1995) that vary by season, by use, by technology, and by space. Tenure niches may overlap when one set of users owns the right to harvest fruits from trees, another set of users owns the right to the timber in these trees, and the trees may be located on land owned by still others (Bruce, Fortmann and Nhira, 1993). Operational rules may allow authorized users to transfer access and withdrawal rights either temporarily through a rental agreement, or permanently when these rights are assigned or sold to others (see Adasiak, 1979, for a description of the rights of authorized users of the Alaskan salmon and herring sheries). Table 1 Bundles of Rights Associated with Positions Owner Proprietor Claimant Authorized Auth. User Entrant Access x x xX x Withdrawal x x Managment xX xX Exclusion x x Alienation x Source: E. Ostrom and Schlager (1996, p. 133).
 [Page 8](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=8)

**Note:** ‘Claimants’ possess the operational rights of access and withdrawal plus a collective-choice right of managing a resource that includes decisions concerning the construction and maintenance of facilities and the authority to devise limits on withdrawal rights. The net shers of Jambudwip, India, for example, annually regulate the positioning of nets so as to avoid interference, but do not have the right to determine who may sh along the coast (Raychaudhuri, 1980). Fishing territories are a frequent form of property for indigenous, inshore shers (Durrenberger and Palsson, 1987).
 [Page 9](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=9)

**Note:** Instead of focusing on one right, it is more useful to dene ve classes of property-rights holders as shown in Table 1. In this view, individuals or collectivities may hold well-dened property rights that include or do not include all ve of the rights dened above. This approach separates the question of whether a particular right is well-dened from the question of the eect of having a particular set of rights. ‘Authorized entrants’ include most recreational users of national parks who purchase an operational right to enter and enjoy the natural beauty of the park, but do not have a right to harvest forest products. Those who have both entry and withdrawal use-right 340 Private and Common Property Rights 2000 units are ‘authorized users’. The presence or absence of constraints upon the timing, technology used, purpose of use and quantity of resource units harvested are determined by operational rules devised by those holding the collective-choice rights (or authority) of management and exclusion. The operational rights of entry and use may be nely divided into quite specic ‘tenure niches’ (Bruce, 1995) that vary by season, by use, by technology, and by space. Tenure niches may overlap when one set of users owns the right to harvest fruits from trees, another set of users owns the right to the timber in these trees, and the trees may be located on land owned by still others (Bruce, Fortmann and Nhira, 1993). Operational rules may allow authorized users to transfer access and withdrawal rights either temporarily through a rental agreement, or permanently when these rights are assigned or sold to others (see Adasiak, 1979, for a description of the rights of authorized users of the Alaskan salmon and herring sheries). Table 1 Bundles of Rights Associated with Positions Owner Proprietor Claimant Authorized Auth. User Entrant Access x x xX x Withdrawal x x Managment xX xX Exclusion x x Alienation x Source: E. Ostrom and Schlager (1996, p. 133).
 [Page 9](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=9)

**Note:** Empirical studies have found that some proprietors have sucient rights to make decisions that promote long-term investment and harvesting from a resource. Place and Hazell (1993) conducted surveys in Ghana, Kenya, and Rwanda to ascertain if indigenous land-right systems were a constraint on agricultural productivity. They found that having the rights of a proprietor as contrasted to an owner in these settings did not aect investment decisions and productivit
 [Page 10](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=10)

**Note:** ‘Owners’ possess the right of alienation - the right to transfer a good in any way the owner wishes that does not harm the physical attributes or uses of other owners - in addition to the bundle of rights held by a proprietor. An individual, a private corporation, a government, or a communal group may possess full ownership rights to any kind of good including a common-pool
 [Page 10](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=10)

**Note:** The next two sections are devoted to a discussion of the attributes of common-pool resources that are conducive to communal proprietorship or communal ownership as contrasted to individual ownershi
 [Page 11](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=11)

**Note:** 6. Attributes of Common-Pool Resources Conducive to the Use of Communal Proprietorship or Ownership
 [Page 12](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=12)

**Note:** Even though all common-pool resources share the diculty of devising methods to achieve exclusion and the subtractability of resource units, the variability of common-pool resources is immense in regard to other attributes that aect the incentives of resource users and the likelihood of achieving outcomes that approach optimality
 [Page 12](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=12)

**Note:** Let us start initially with a discussion of land as a resource system. Where population density is extremely low, land is abundant, and land generates a rich diversity of plant and animal products without much husbandry, the expected costs of establishing and defending boundaries to a parcel of land of any size may be greater than the expected benets of enclosure (Demsetz, 1967; Feeny, 1993). Settlers moving into a new terrain characterized by high risk due to danger from others, from a harsh environment, or from lack of appropriate knowledge, may decide to develop one large, common parcel prior to any divisions into smaller parcels (Ellickson, 1993). Once land becomes scarce, conict over who has the rights to invest in improvements and reap the results of their eorts can lead individuals to want to enclose land through fencing or institutional means to protect their investments. There are tradeos in costs to be considered, however. The more land included within one enclosure, the lower the costs of defending all the boundaries, but the higher the costs of regulating the use of the enclosed parcel.
 [Page 12](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=12)

**Note:** In a classic study of the diversity of property-rights systems used for many centuries by Swiss peasants, Netting (1976, 1981) observed that the same individuals fully divided their agricultural land into separate family-owned parcels, but that grazing lands located on the Alpine hillsides were organized into communal property systems. In these mountain valleys, the same individuals used dierent property-rights systems side-by-side for multiple centuries. Each local community had considerable autonomy to change local rules, so there was no problem of someone else imposing an inecient set of rules on them. Netting argued that attributes of the resource aected which property-rights systems were most likely for diverse purposes. Netting identied ve attributes that he considered to be most conducive to the development of communal property rights:
 [Page 13](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=13)

**Note:** low value of production per unit of area; high variance in the availability of resource units on any one parcel; low returns from intensication of investment; substantial economies of scale by utilizing a large area; and substantial economies of scale in building infrastructures to utilize the large area.
 [Page 13](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=13)

**Note:** Steep land where rainfall is scattered may not be suitable for most agricultural purposes, but can be excellent land for pasture and forests if aggregated into suciently large parcels. By developing communal property rights to large parcels of such land, those who are members of the community are able to share environmental risks due to the unpredictability of rain-induced growth of grasses within any smaller region. Further, herding and processing of milk products is subject to substantial economies of scale. If individual families develop means to share these reduced costs, all can save substantially. Building the appropriate roads, retaining walls and processing facilities may also be done more economically if these eorts are shared. While the Swiss peasants were able to devote these harsh lands to productive activities, they had to invest time and eort in the development of rules that would reduce the incentives to overgraze and would ensure that investments in shared infrastructure were maintained over time. In many Swiss villages, rights to common pasturage were distributed according to the number of cows that could be carried over the winter using hay supplies produced on the owners’ private parcels. In all cases, the village determined who would be allowed to use, the specic access and withdrawal rights to be used, how investment and maintenance costs were to be shared, and how the annual returns from common processing activities were to be shared.
 [Page 13](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=13)

**Note:** The importance of sharing risk is stressed in other theoretical and empirical studies of communal proprietorships (Antilla and Torp, 1996; Gupta, 1986, Nugent and Sanchez, 1993). Unpredictability and risk are increased in systems where resource units are mobile and where storage facilities, such as dams, do not exist (Schlager, Blomquist and Tang, 1994). Institutional facilities for sharing risk, such as formal insurance systems or institutionalized mechanisms for reciprocal obligations in times of plenty, also aect the kinds of property-rights systems that individuals can devise. When no physical or institutional mechanisms exist for sharing risk, communal property arrangements may enable individuals to adopt productive activities not feasible under individual property rights. A recent study has demonstrated that the variance in the productivity of land over space - due largely to the variance in rainfall from year to year - is strongly associated with the size of communally held parcels allocated to grazing in the Sudan (Nugent and Sanchez, 1995)
 [Page 14](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=14)

**Note:** Ellickson (1993) compares the types of environmental and personal security risks faced by new settlers in New England, in Bermuda, and in Utah to explain the variance in the speed of converting jointly held land to individually held land in each of these settlements.
 [Page 14](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=14)

**Note:** A consistent nding across many studies of communal property-rights systems is that these systems do not exist in isolation and are usually used in conjunction with individual ownership. In most irrigation systems that are built and managed by the farmers themselves, for example, each farmer owns his or her own plot(s) while participating as a joint proprietor or owner in a communally organized irrigation system (Coward, 1980; Sengupta, 1991, 1993; Tang, 1992; Vincent, 1995; Wade, 1992). Water is allocated to individual participants using a variety of individually tailored rules, but those irrigation systems that have survived for long periods of time tend to allocate water and responsibilities for joint costs using a similar metric - frequently the amount of land owned by a farmer (E. Ostrom, 1990, 1992). In other words, benets are roughly proportional to the costs of investing and maintaining the system itself.
 [Page 14](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=14)

**Note:** Contrary to the expectation that communal property systems lacking the right to alienate ownership shares are markedly less ecient than property-rights systems involving full ownership, substantial evidence exists that many communal proprietorships eectively solve a wide diversity of local problems with relatively low transaction costs (Ganey, 1992; Hanna and Munasinghe, 1995a, 1995c; Kaul, 1996; Sandberg, 1993, 1996a, 1996b; Wilson, 1995). Obtaining valid and reliable measures of outputs and costs for a large number of property-rights systems covering similar activities in matched environmental settings is extremely dicul
 [Page 15](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=15)

**Note:** Performance of communal property-rights systems varies substantially, however, as do the performance of all property-rights systems. Some communal systems fail or limp along at the margin of eectiveness just as private rms fail or barely hang on to protability over long periods of time. In addition to the environmental variables discussed above that are conducive in the rst place to the use of communal proprietorship or ownership, the following variables related to the attributes of participants are conducive to their selection of norms, rules, and property rights that enhance the performance of communal property-rights systems (E. Ostrom, 1993):
 [Page 15](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=15)

**Note:** 1. Accurate information about the condition of the resource and expected d ow of benets and costs is available at low cost to the participants (Blomquist, 1992; Gilles and Jamtgaard, 1981). 2000 Private and Common Property Rights 347 2. Participants share a common understanding about the potential benets and risks associated with the continuance of the status quo as contrasted with changes in norms and rules that they could feasibly adopt (E. Ostrom, 1990; Sethi and Somanathan, 1996). 3. Participants share generalized norms of reciprocity and trust that can be used as initial social capital (Cordell and McKean, 1992). 4. The group using the resource is relatively stable (Seabright, 1993). 5. Participants plan to live and work in the same area for a long time (and in some cases, expect their ospring to live there as well) and, thus, do not heavily discount the future (Grima and Berkes, 1989). 6. Participants use collective-choice rules that fall between the extremes of unanimity or control by a few (or even bare majority) and, thus, avoid high transaction or high deprivation costs (E. Ostrom, 1990). 7. Participants can develop relatively accurate and low-cost monitoring and sanctioning arrangements (Berkes, 1992).
 [Page 15](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=15)

**Note:** 1. Accurate information about the condition of the resource and expected d ow of benets and costs is available at low cost to the participants (Blomquist, 1992; Gilles and Jamtgaard, 1981). 2000 Private and Common Property Rights 347 2. Participants share a common understanding about the potential benets and risks associated with the continuance of the status quo as contrasted with changes in norms and rules that they could feasibly adopt (E. Ostrom, 1990; Sethi and Somanathan, 1996). 3. Participants share generalized norms of reciprocity and trust that can be used as initial social capital (Cordell and McKean, 1992). 4. The group using the resource is relatively stable (Seabright, 1993). 5. Participants plan to live and work in the same area for a long time (and in some cases, expect their ospring to live there as well) and, thus, do not heavily discount the future (Grima and Berkes, 1989). 6. Participants use collective-choice rules that fall between the extremes of unanimity or control by a few (or even bare majority) and, thus, avoid high transaction or high deprivation costs (E. Ostrom, 1990). 7. Participants can develop relatively accurate and low-cost monitoring and sanctioning arrangements (Berkes, 1992).
 [Page 16](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=16)

**Note:** Heterogeneity in the knowledge and acceptance of local common property regimes is likely to lead to their undoing. In frontier regions, new migrants increase the number of people sharing the return from a common-pool resource. Further, migrants are unlikely to recognize the legitimacy of extant, de facto, property-rights systems (see Alston, Libecap and Schneider, 1996). Thus, the common agreement necessary for the
 [Page 17](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=17)

**Note:** 7. Attributes of Common-Pool Resources Conducive to the Use of Individual Rights to Withdrawal, Management, Exclusion, and Alienation
 [Page 18](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=18)

**Note:** Industrial and agricultural commodities clearly t the denition of private goods. Individual rights to exclusion and to transferring control over these goods generate incentives that lead to higher levels of productivity than other forms of property arrangements.
 [Page 18](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=18)

**Note:** It has frequently been assumed that land also is clearly always a private good and therefore best allocated using market mechanisms based on individual ownership rights. Agricultural land in densely settled regions is usually best allocated by a system of individual property rights. Gaining formal title to land, however, may or may not increase eciency. Feder et al. (1988) conducted an important econometric study that showed that agricultural land in Thailand without a formal title was worth only one-half to two-thirds of land with a formal title. Further, increasing the security of private-property rights also led to an increased value of the crops produced (between one-tenth and one-fourth higher than those without secure title). More secure titling also provided better access to credit and led to greater investments in improved land productivity (see also Feder and Feeny, 1991). Insecure property rights may lead potential users to arm and engage in violent conict so as to gain control over land through force or by negotiation to avoid force. Several types of economic losses result from conict over ownership (Skaperdas and Syropoulos, 1995; Umbeck, 1981a, 1981b).
 [Page 18](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=18)

**Note:** sustenance of any property-rights system may rapidly disappear if settlement patterns undergo a rapid change. Similarly, common property systems related to inshore sheries have also proved to be unstable when trawlers from other locations start to visit on a regular basis without recognizing the de facto property rights of local shers.
 [Page 18](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=18)

**Note:** A commonly recommended solution to problems associated with the governance and management of mobile resource units, such as water and d sh, is their ‘privatization’ (Christy, 1973; Clark, 1980). What private ownership usually means in regard to mobile resource units, however, is individual ownership of withdrawal rights. Water rights are normally associated with the allocation of a particular quantity of water per unit of time or the allocation of a right to take water for a particular period of time or at a particular location. Fishing rights are similarly associated with quantity, time, or location. These rights are typically ‘withdrawal’ rights that are tied to resource units and not to a resource system. In addition to the individual water rights that farmers hold in an irrigation system, they may also jointly own - and, therefore, govern and manage - the irrigation facilities themselves (Tang, 1992). In addition to the quotas or ‘shing units’ that individual shers may own, no one owns the shing stock and governmental units may exercise various types of management rights in relationship to these stocks (Schlager, 1990).
 [Page 19](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=19)

**Note:** 8. Communal Property Regimes in the Twenty-First Century
 [Page 20](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=20)

**Note:** A very large number of housing developments - both apartment houses and individual family dwellings - involve individual property to the housing unit itself combined with communal property to the grounds, recreational facilities, and other joint facilities. While individuals can buy and sell their individual housing units, at the time of purchase they assume a set of duties in respect to the closely related communal properties. Monthly assessments for the repair and maintenance of these common facilities are not unlike the assessments made by a community of irrigators on themselves for the maintenance of their own system.
 [Page 20](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=20)

**Note:** Considerable recent research has also stressed the importance of involving participants in the design and implementation of such property-rights systems. When participants do not look upon such rules as legitimate, eective, and fair, the capacity to invent evasive strategies is substantial (Seabright, 1993; J. Wilson, 1995). The size of the group involved and the heterogeneity of participants also aect the costs of maintaining withdrawal-rights systems (Edwards, 1994). And, the very process of allocating quantitative and transferable rights to resource units may undo some of the common understandings and norms that allowed communal ownership systems to operate at lower day-to-day administrative costs.
 [Page 20](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=20)

**Note:** Similarly, many sports clubs allocate use quotas to members and assess members regular fees for the maintenance of the commonly owned facilities.
 [Page 21](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=21)

**Note:** The modern corporation is frequently thought of as the epitome of private property. While buying and selling shares of corporate stock is a clear example of the rights of alienation at work, relationships within a rm are far from being ‘individual’ ownership rights. Since the income that will be shared among stockholders, management, and employees is itself a common pool to be shared, all of the incentives leading to free riding (shirking) and overuse (padding the budget) are found within the structure of a modern corporation (Ghoshal and Moran, 1996; Putterman, 1995; Seabright, 1993).
 [Page 21](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/Private%20and%20common%20property%20rights.pdf#page=21)
