# Notes from The benefits of land registration and titling_ economic and social perspectives.pdf

**Note:** Land registration is only a means to an end. It is not an end in itself. Much time, money, and effort can be wasted if that elementary truth be forgotten. (Simpson, 1976)
 [Page 1](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=1)

**Note:** Preoccupation with land, and with arrangements pertaining to land use and possession, has been common in most cultures since the dawn of history.
 [Page 1](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=1)

**Note:** Some 3700 years ago, the patriarch Abraham, who was a wealthy livestock owner without land, needed to acquire a tract of land for the purpose of burying his departed wife. He identified a suitable site (which included a cave—a prized burial place in those days), and suggested to the owner, Efron the Hittite, that he should sell it to him. 

Abraham declined an offer from Efron of free use of the land, and insisted on paying for it. apparently because he wanted to establish, through the payment of money, his (and his heirs’) unchallenged ownership. Furthermore, the actual payment took place at the city gate. a traditional public meeting place. in front of the city notables and with many citizens witnessing the transfer of possession (Genesis 23). The emphasis placed on witnesses and publicity stems from an issue which is still relevant in today’s land transactions: the need to verify who owns land being sold. so that there will be no risk of future challenges which may cause the buyer costs or even loss of property. While conducting transactions in the public domain resolves some of the risk, it is not an efficient arrangement, especially when the volume of transactions becomes large
 [Page 1](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=1)

**Note:** The Bible tells of the prophet Jeremiah (7th century B.c.). who bought a tract of land from his cousin. This time, in addition to the presence of some witnesses, the transaction was recorded in two copies of a written deed, where all terms and conditions were specified. One deed was scaled, the other one was left open, and both copies were deposited with a certain priest of the central temple. who kept them in an earthen jar so ‘that they may continue many days’ (Jeremiah 32)
 [Page 1](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=1)

**Note:** The prophet Jeremiah, even though he bought land from a presumably trusted cousin, insisted on a written deed so that if any future challenge were to be brought against his ownership, he could document his ownership. Similarly, if he was ever to sell that tract of land. he would have a certification of ownership (guarded by a priest. apparently because priests were trusted not to allow tampering with documents as they would not take bribes).
 [Page 2](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=2)

**Note:** The Bible tells of the prophet Jeremiah (7th century B.C.). who bought a tract of land from his cousin. This time, in addition to the presence of some witnesses, the transaction was recorded in two copies of a written deed, where all terms and conditions were specified. One deed was scaled, the other one was left open, and both copies were deposited with a certain priest of the central temple. who kept them in an earthen jar so ‘that they may continue many days’ (Jeremiah 32)
 [Page 2](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=2)

**Note:** Many developing countries consider land registration to be a high priority in their quest to develop their economies. Transitional economies have been particularly interested in land registration, as they endeavor to become more market-based. It would be useful for decision-makers in developing countries to understand clearly the extent and nature of benefits which can reasonably be expected from land registration, since they must allocate their scarce resources across different uses based on their expected benefits
 [Page 2](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=2)

**Note:** For instance, what are the gains In agricultural productivity a country would obtain from land registration. and how would these gains measure up against benefits from extension services for example? As will be demonstrated in the empirical section of this paper, land registration systems can have large economic and social impacts. under the right set of circumstances, and should be considered as a key form of public investment
 [Page 2](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=2)

**Note:** However, for something which has been vigorously practiced for thousands of years around the world, there has been relatively little analytical work done on the economic benefits of Jand registration until the last decade. The aim of this paper is to revisit a conceptual framework for the ceonomic benefits of land registration, take stock of the empirical work on the benefits of land registration
 [Page 2](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=2)

**Note:** Economics of land registration: a conceptual framework
 [Page 2](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=2)

**Note:** Such a framework was first developed in the context of a study on rural Thailand (Feder ef af, 1988). <mark style="background: #FF5582A6;">Two sources of linkage between titles and economic performance are highlighted, namely the effect of titles in enhancing tenure security, and the role of titles in collateral arrangements, facilitating access to institutional credit</mark>
 [Page 2](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=2)

**Note:** The incentive to undertake these investments is thus affected significantly by the expectations regarding the length of the horizon over which the investor might reap the benefits. These expectations, in turn. depend on the risk of challenges to the investor's possession of the land, whether through ownership disputes, eviction, or expropriation by government. These risks are referred to commonly as “tenure insecurity
 [Page 3](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=3)

**Note:** Registration systems and land titles have emerged in mankind's history as an institutional arrangement to reduce such insecurity. With ownership officially documented and verified, the risk of challenges to ownership is reduced. and the likelihood of having to incur high costs in defending one’s possession of land is lower, incenlives to invest are enhanced, and land productivity is increased
 [Page 3](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=3)

**Note:** Credit transactions are inherently risky, as the lender provides cash in advance against a promise of repayment (with interest) over time. Lenders have typically less information than the borrower regarding the prospects of the loan being repaid in full and in a timely fashion, hence the emergence of collateral arrangements where fixed assets, most often land, are used as a guarantee for loan repayment. For land to serve as a collateral, the lender must be assured that the borrower is indeed the owner. and thus a secure title is needed to mortgage land, especially when borrowing from formal lending institutions which often have imperfect information on the borrowe
 [Page 3](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=3)

**Note:** In fact. in the Thai study referred to above, farmers expressed that the main benefit they perceived in secure tithes was the access to credit that they would gain. By obtaining credit at a lower cost and higher amount, the newly titled farmer can now increase investment and input use, leading to higher productivity per unit of land.
 [Page 3](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=3)

**Note:** At any given point in time, the distribution of land ownership or possession does not necessarily coincide with the distribution of skills and means to make the best economic use of land. It is thus possible that the productivity of land under its present holder is lower than the productivity it would have under a different operator, who may have better skills. or the means to invest in complementary improvements. Land sales and rentals normally resolve these temporary inefficiencies in land allocation, as those with potentially higher-value uses for land are able to offer a price (or a rental income) which is higher than the capitalized value of the land to the present (low-value) user, thus inducing an exchange of ownership or possession, and ultimately an increase in productivity.
 [Page 3](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=3)

**Note:** Whereas land transactions have been taking place since the dawn of history, the extent of such transactions is affected by the asymmetry of information between buyers and sellers. As long as transactions are mostly between individuals who are members of the same community, information is quite symmetric and the buyer can castly establish whether the seller has indeed the right to sell. Customary systems usually evolve to handle transactions within the community, and they can function cffectively. But as land markets expand and transactions increase between individuals who are not closely related, uncertainty over the entitlement of an owner to transfer land rights becomes increasingly relevant. One way to reduce or eliminate ownership uncertainty, and thereby improve market efficiency, 1s to provide landowners with titles, backed by a legal system capable of enforcing those property rights (Feder ef al. 1988
 [Page 4](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=4)

**Note:** Economics of land registration: empirical evidence
 [Page 5](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=5)

**Note:** The analytical discussion of the economic benefits of land titling and registration has evolved from carlicr theoretical discussion and descriptive statistics to increasingly more rigorous quantitative analysis. The last decade, in particular, has seen a significant world-wide effort by many researchers to quantify the economic benefits of secure Ownership in gencral, and land registration systems in particular. The quantification of economic impacts is of much importance to policy-makers. as there are various potentially worthy targets for public spending.
 [Page 5](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=5)

**Note:** Some of the carly literature highlighted the effect of land titling on access to formal credit, since a land title is often a mandatory precondition for commercial or official bank loans (Wai, 1957: Sacay. 1973: Dorner and Saliba, 1981; Collier, 1983: Aku, 1986). Panandikar (1956) illustrated the interest payment savings realized through land registration, through an example of lenders charging 8 to 16 on secured loans compared with 18 to 37.5% on unsecured loans, in some parts of India. However. until the late 1980s, there was little quantitative analysis on the link between secure land tenure and the use of credit.
 [Page 5](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=5)

**Note:** Salas et al. (1970) found that, in Costa Rica, positive correlations (in the range of 0.40 to 0.67) existed between the degree of ownership security and farm investment per unit of land. Villamizar (1984) found that, in three Brazilian states, investment per hectare ts substantially greater on titled Jand than on undocumented or encroached land. Survey results from Jamaica indicate that the incidence of permanent and semi-permanent crops was substantially higher among titled farmers than among untitled farmers—almost twice as high. Indeed, a third of the recipients of titles under a government program reported that following the change in their status they planted more permanent and semi-permanent crops than they did before the initiation of the procyct (IDB. 1986).
 [Page 5](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=5)

**Note:** Mosher (1966) asserted that tenure insecurity ts an important source of low productivity in agriculture. Salas ef al (1970) estimated a positive correlation of 0.53 between income per unit of land and security of ownership, in one province in Costa Rica
 [Page 5](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=5)

**Note:** The level of econometric rigor of these carlier studies, however, was not adequate to support a firm conclusion on the magnitude of the economic impact generated by land registration systems, as the influence of other factors affecting economic performance was not fully controlled in the analyses
 [Page 5](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=5)

**Note:** The case of rural Thailand
 [Page 6](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=6)

**Note:** One of the first detailed. empirical works on the economic benefits of land registration was the study on rural Thailand (Feder et al., 1988). The study used cconometric analysis to compare the cconomic performance of two groups of farmers: those without legal titles who operate in forest reserve areas, and another group of farmers with legal titles operating outside the forest reserve boundarics
 [Page 6](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=6)

**Note:** The effect of land registration on farmers’ access to credit was clearly established, as shown in Table |. It shows that. when taking into account both the direct effect of land being available as collateral and the indirect effect of greater land value resulting from a title, titled farmers who provide land as collateral are offered significantly more institutional credit than untitled farmers. Farmers with legal titles had access to 52-521% more institutional credit than those without.
 [Page 6](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=6)

**Note:** Differences in cconomic performance between titled and untitle farmers were also clearly established, as summarized in Table 2. Per unit of land, titled farmers invested more in land. used more inputs, and generated higher output than untitled farmers. This translated into higher revenue (agricultural and non-agricultural) by 14.5 to 20.8%. and higher land price by 25.0 to 132.6%: these figures are roughly consistent with the availability of institutional credi
 [Page 6](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=6)

**Note:** the benfits of land registration needed to be discussed in terms of social benefits. instead of benefits to individual farmers. and in comparison with the costs of land registration to be borne by the society. It was demonstrated in the study that, if the probability of eviction is higher than zero, the market price of untitled land is lower than its social valuc (the total discounted value of the gross social benefits to be generated from such land). since farmers are risk averse in the sense that they need incentives (price discounts) to buy untitled land
 [Page 7](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=7)

**Note:** The gross (percentage) increase in social welfare from registering land of a given quality was then calculated as a proportion of the market price of eaviticd land of the same quality, using the following formula: B= (Pt/Py)@-1 where P, and Py, are the market prices of uted and untitled land respectively, and @ is a term less than | which summarizes various conversion factors needed to convert market prices into social prices by climinating distortions.
 [Page 7](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=7)

**Note:** By calculating @ (assuming that the real rate of interest is 12°) and using the estimated cost of land registration, the benefit/cost ratios of land registration in the four provinces were calculated to be as summarized in Table 3. These results indicate high rates of return to titling in the three northeastern provinces. The benefits would be much lower in the central province, for reasons explained carlier.
 [Page 7](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=7)

**Note:** The case of urban Philippines Jimenez (1984) compared unit housing prices between the non-squatter (formal) residential arcas and the squatter (informal) areas in the city of Davao, the Philippines, to estimate the average premium for tenure security. Based on a sample of 3344 households, including 1505 in the informal sector and 1839 in the formal, the study concluded that unit housing prices in the formal sector are 58% higher than otherwise identical units in the informal secto
 [Page 7](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=7)

**Note:** The case of urban Indonesia A study by Dowall and Leaf (1990) analyzed the effect of, afer alia, tenure on residential plot prices, based on interviews with real estate brokers in Jakarta. Land prices were found to be affected strongly by the level of tenure security. as shown in Table 4. The security of tenure is classified into three categories: having a registered title: having no title but having a tax receipt (called girth) which is often used by the government as evidence of land right; and no title or tax receipt. Given the same level of infrastructure and the same distance from the city center, the higher the security of tenure, the higher the price
 [Page 8](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=8)

**Note:** The case of rural India The econometric models used in Feder et af (1988) were applied to measure the effects of transferable land rights on credit, land investment and land use in rural India (Pender and Kerr, 1994). The study surveyed the poor rice-growing villages of Aurepalle and Dokur in Andra Pradesh. sampling 165 and 126 households respectively. To assess the benefits of land transferability, comparison was made between titled (transferable) land and ‘assigned’ land, which is land granted to the poor under the government's land distribution schemes (officially non-transferable, except to the heirs of the recipients). Econometric analysis showed that the land rights status. namely its transferability, has had little effect on investment or credit. In fact. differences between titled land and assigned land. in terms of credit use and investment. appear to be duc mostly to differences in the quality of the land. On the other hand. the study found that the land rights status affects land values significantly: assigned land is worth 15% less than titled land of comparable quality, owing to lack of transferability. These results are thus not fully internally consistent. although the explanation offered by the paper is consistent with the conceptual model
 [Page 8](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=8)

**Note:** put forth in Feder et al. (1988) and described in the section on economics of land registration. In a nutshell, the paper submits that transferable rights have had little effect on credit and investment because formal credit is rarely available in these areas (while informal credit is abundant), and consequently formal credit is largely irrelevant to marginal decisions about investment. This explanation is consistent with a specific finding in Feder et al. (1988), that the impact of title was relatively unimportant in one study area where informal lending was predominant. The difference in land values suggests, however, that there is a premium for the transferability, while the investment effect may be too small to be detected by the econometric work.
 [Page 9](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=9)

**Note:** Experiences in Latin America and the Caribbean
 [Page 9](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=9)

**Note:** The Honduras paper is based on surveys of 450 farm households in the Departments of Santa Barbara and Comayogua. conducted first in 1983 and then in 1994, to see the difference in economic performance between those who had titles even in 1983, those who received titles under a USAID-financed land titling project after 1983, and those who were not titled by 1994, Its findings echo the Thailand report (Feder ef al., 1988). First, the total average annual investment over the 1983-1993 for the USAID-titled farmers (Lps. 1730 or USS 270)? was more than twice the level of the investment by the untitled farmers (Lps, 797 or USS 124). as shown in Table 5. It is also worth noting that the difference in investment between the two types of farmer is more strongly significant for investments attached to land*® (116.5%: higher for those titled after 1983) than for non-attached investments.*?
 [Page 9](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=9)

**Note:** Second, USAID-titled farmers had far greater access to credit. both in terms of the proportion of farmers who received credit (30% compared with 22%.) and the average amount of credit received (Lps. 4568 compared with Lps. 1008). as shown in Table 6
 [Page 9](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=9)

**Note:** The study goes on to calculate rates of return from land registration, by defining the returns to be gains made in household income associated with improved efficiency in the use of purchased inputs. due to improved access to credit. and also in potential gains of increasing capital attached to land induced by land registration—similar to the economic benefits of land registration as defined in Feder e¢ af (1988)
 [Page 10](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=10)

**Note:** Assuming the land registration cost of US$ 600 per title, the rate of return was calculated to be 17°, which is significantly higher than the real lending rate in Honduras and also higher than the actual average rates of return of World Bank projects implemented over the last 15 years. which is 14¢
 [Page 10](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=10)

**Note:** The Paraguay study. based on. surveys of 300 farm households conducted tn 1991 and 1994, also found that land registration increased land-attached investment, and enhanced the supply of credit. The main empirical finding was the significant effect of land titles on the productivity with which the agricultural resource base is utilized, when controlling for both the observable and latent characteristics of farms and farmers with title.
 [Page 10](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=10)

**Note:** The household data also confirm that the impact of secure tithe on farm investment is significant: titked land had a higher share (by 21-48% ) of the arca devoted to pastures and permanent crops (requiring fencing and land improvements). The authors thus conclude that ‘title plays a_ very important role in promoting investments in land improvements’ (Alston ef al.. 1996, p. 51).
 [Page 11](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=11)

**Note:** A study on Peru by De Soto (1989) illustrates the case of a widely used. but not very effective informal system. According to the study, 69% of houses built in Lima. Peru in 1985 were ‘governed by the extra-legal system’, duc largely to the high costs of cngaging the legal system. However, the ‘extra-legal system’ offers much less tenure security than the legal system: the same paper estimates that 13% of the lots recognized in informal settlements are in litigation.
 [Page 11](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=11)

**Note:** The cases of rural Africa Whereas the above studies in Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean make a clear and consistent case for land registration as an economic proposition, the picture emanating from various studics in Africa has been mixed. A comparative study of ten rainfed agriculture regions in Ghana, Rwanda and Kenya, based on farm surveys conducted during 1987-1988 (Migot-Adholla er af, 1991), found that land registration did not have <¢ clear impact on productivity, land improvements or credit access in these areas. The paper underlines the output constraints faced by these African regions in terms of physical infrastructure, effective credit systems and marketing institutions
 [Page 11](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=11)

**Note:** The paper concludes that land registration ts ‘unlikely to be economically worthwhile for much of Sub-Saharan Africa at this stage of economic development’, except in certain cases where indigenous tenure systems are weak, where the incidence of land disputes in high, or where major project interventions are planned and require full privatization of land rights for their success.
 [Page 11](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=11)

**Note:** Social aspects and policy implications
 [Page 12](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=12)

**Note:** In the previous section we reviewed the economics of land registration and property rights in action, through empirical evidence from Asia. Latin America, and Africa. The net economic benefits of land registration can be substantial. However, some of the expericnees indicate that land regtstration would not be economically worthwhile when certain key factors are missing. In this section, we will take stock of the policy implications, addressing two broad issues: first. what are the key prerequisites for economic viability of land registration; and second, if the time is ripe for land registration, what are the key factors in ensuring that the design and implementation of land registration programs are conducive to achieving equitable social outcomes? These questions would be particularly important for decision makers in developing countries
 [Page 12](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=12)

**Note:** Thus. there should be reasonably well-functioning financial markets, which can extend longterm credits when land is used as collateral (most likely through institutional channels)
 [Page 13](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=13)

**Note:** There should also be clear incentive to increase Output per unit area. through investment in land-attached investments and use of more variable inputs, in terms of existing economic opportunities: farmers may have little such incentive if markets for produce are too far away. land is infertile, distribution systems for agricultural inputs do not function well. labor shortage 1s persistent, etc. For example, the first major investment in Thailand's land registration system at the latter part of the 19th century became viable only when the country opened up to foreign trade, making rice production very profitable and thus inducing an expansion of land cultivation. Similarly, urban investors may not be inclined to itensify investments, even if land ownership security is enhanced through registration, when the general economic environment is not conducive to business.
 [Page 13](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=13)

**Note:** Benefits to land registration through greater efficiency of the land market cannot be taken for granted. The lack of a formal land registry will not constrain land markets if there is tthe demand for land transactions in a particular areca, or if customary land rights systems are sufficient to facilitate the types and volumes of transaction that are typical in the area under consideration. It is well known that many customary tenure systems function quite well in supporting transfers of land rights from one person to the other, mostly within a specific group of people. For instance, much of the 5 million hectares of land in the province of West Sumatra, Indonesia, comes under a traditional system of communal rights (Aak ulayat), even in some of the urban areas. The system has worked well in enabling transfers of land rights matrilineally, over centurics
 [Page 13](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=13)

**Note:** Another important point is that there should not be stringent regulatorv. restrictions which affect land transactions. Overly complicated procedures related to approval of land use tend to increase the transaction cost and limit land market activity
 [Page 14](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=14)

**Note:** Social aspects of land registration programs
 [Page 14](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=14)

**Note:** The discussion has focused so far on economic aspects of the land registration system. but has not addressed social aspects such as equity and poverty alleviation. A consideration of these aspects is important, because investments in an improved or modern registration system, if not implemented properly, can produce undesirable and unintended outcomes. On the other hand, if the interventions are well thought through, a registration system can introduce better protection of the rights of socially weaker groups, and can provide better scope for poverty alleviation.
 [Page 14](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=14)

**Note:** A frequently mentioned argument by policy makers against formalization of land rights. and the lowering of the cost of land market transactions which they induce. is that in the resultant more active market, the smallholders and the poor will be tempted to sell their land to larger landowners, or to wealthier persons. This, it is argued. will lead to the emergence of a large landless class, with attendant social instability. While the theoretical underpinnings of these arguments are not necessarily well founded, one could conceive of circumstances where asymmetry of information and of opportunities could lead to socially undesirable land sales.
 [Page 14](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=14)

**Note:** Anecdotal evidence frequently points to instances of abuses of the kind indicated above. in) various countrics, exacerbated by the incidence, sometimes. of officials who, by the temptations of greed or for political expedience, collaborate with wealthier and more powerful individuals. The potential for such undesirable outcomes is larger when registration and titling are sporadic (ie. performed upon demand = by — individual landholders)
 [Page 14](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=14)

**Note:** There are several principles that a government can pursue in order to reduce the risk of undesirable social impact of land registration initiatives. First and foremost, the land registry should be administered on the basis of transparency principles. Whereas some governments tend to restrict access to the land registry, most often to contain land speculation, such a policy would facilitate abuses by certain people who have access, make land transactions uncertain, and reduce the reliability of land records. It should be made clear to the public, through various media, what are the administrative procedures for land registration and what are the fees involved, Second, and related to the above, landholders should be closely involved in the registration process. Land registration can be difficult: and unfair unless the potential beneficiaries and their neighbors are called upon to provide evidence and documents, preferably in an on-site situation together with neighbours, and are asked to discuss boundaries, give testimonies about other residents, etc. Consultation with the beneficiarics. reliance on communitics and community-based organizations, simplicity of procedures and speed of delivery can be used to enhance landholder involvement and improve the prospects for equitable outcomes.
 [Page 15](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=15)

**Note:** Third, key social tssues which could affect the benefits of land registration should be examined before setting out on a land registration program. There may be two areas which merit particularly careful assessment: the impact On women: and policies towards customary land tenure. For women, land registration would not be beneficial if existing regulations make it difficult for women to benefit from land registration, or even affect women’s rights adversely.
 [Page 15](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=15)

**Note:** Fourth, there should be effective monitoring of developments on the ground. In Indonesia, initial results from field work in systematically-registered arcas have not identified instances of land-grabbing or any other incidents with strong negative social impact. Conversely, the results have pointed to widespread coverage of the registration effort (including the poor) and relatively little rent-sceking.
 [Page 15](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=15)

**Note:** Recent technological breakthroughs such as the hand-held global positioning systems may offer even more cost-effective options. Large investments in) sophisticated land records management systems should be weighed against the existing human resource base, the insitutional capacity of the executing agency. and potential returns from alternative land-related investments
 [Page 16](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=16)

**Note:** First, social and equity impact of the formalization of land registration. While an increasing body of literature is emerging on economic aspects of land registration systems, there has been very little rigorous documentation and analysis of the equity implications of the introduction of a more formal system
 [Page 16](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=16)

**Note:** Second, impact of registration systems on transactions in the land market. As highlighted in carlier sections, the reduction of uncertainty regarding ownership is expected to enhance the level of activity in the land market. affording increase in the overall efficiency of land allocation. Hlowever. there has been a paucity of empirical research on the veracity of this proposition. and on the actual extent of land transactions under different levels of formality of the property rights system
 [Page 16](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=16)

**Note:** Third. more quantitative analysis is needed on the economic implica40) The benefits of land registration and titling: G Feder and A Nishio tions of customary land tenure. and the extent to which economic development is affecting the security that such systems entail. While conflict between customary and ‘modern’ rights have been reported in various countries, lack of accurate information has been one of the major constraints to a constructive dialogue towards mutually acceptable solutions.
 [Page 16](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=16)

**Note:** Third. more quantitative analysis is needed on the economic implica40) The benefits of land registration and titling: G Feder and A Nishio tions of customary land tenure. and the extent to which economic development is affecting the security that such systems entail. While conflict between customary and ‘modern’ rights have been reported in various countries, lack of accurate information has been one of the major constraints to a constructive dialogue towards mutually acceptable solutions.
 [Page 17](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=17)

**Note:** Fourth, an assessment of the benefits of ongoing land registration and emerging land markets in some of the former Soviet bloc countries. The establishment of private ownership rights is considered to be of paramount importance in these countries. prompting many of these countries to start on land registration programs. The World Bank alone is assisting governments in eleven former Sovict bloc countries (as of June 1997), to develop and implement land registration programs of various scales. It would help the policymakers in these countries to make decisions on the scope. timing and approaches for land registration, if there is empirical evidence on the benfits of ongoing land registration and emerging land markets in those former Soviet bloc countries which are forerunners in. these efforts. However, it should be emphasized that the objectives and nature of land registration in these countries are clearly different from those countries with long traditions of private land use. As stated in World Bank (1996). the immediate objective of land registration programs in the former Soviet bloc countries is ‘to assist the creation of private ownership and transferability of assets. The main economic benefits will therefore be measurable only on a longer-term basis.
 [Page 17](skim:///Users/dineshmahapatra/Library/CloudStorage/GoogleDrive-dineshmahapatra123%40gmail.com/My%20Drive/PhD/7%20-%20Papers/The%20benefits%20of%20land%20registration%20and%20titling_%20economic%20and%20social%20perspectives.pdf#page=17)
